# RISC-V Platform-Level Interrupt Controller Specification

## Copyright and license information

This RISC-V PLIC specification is

[%hardbreaks]
(C) 2017 Drew Barbier <drew@sifive.com>
(C) 2018-2019 Palmer Dabbelt <palmer@sifive.com>

It is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (CC-BY 4.0).  The full license text is available at
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

## Introduction

This document contains the RISC-V platform-level interrupt controller (PLIC)
specification, which defines an interrupt controller specifically designed to
work in the context of RISC-V systems.  The PLIC multiplexes various device
interrupts onto the external interrupt lines of various hart contexts, with
hardware support for interrupt priorities.

## Memory Map

FIXME: This should be more than a comment

/*
 * The PLIC consists of memory-mapped control registers, with a memory map as
 * follows:
 *
 * base + 0x000000: Reserved (interrupt source 0 does not exist)
 * base + 0x000004: Interrupt source 1 priority
 * base + 0x000008: Interrupt source 2 priority
 * ...
 * base + 0x000FFC: Interrupt source 1023 priority
 * base + 0x001000: Pending 0
 * base + 0x001FFF: Pending
 * base + 0x002000: Enable bits for sources 0-31 on context 0
 * base + 0x002004: Enable bits for sources 32-63 on context 0
 * ...
 * base + 0x0020FC: Enable bits for sources 992-1023 on context 0
 * base + 0x002080: Enable bits for sources 0-31 on context 1
 * ...
 * base + 0x002100: Enable bits for sources 0-31 on context 2
 * ...
 * base + 0x1F1F80: Enable bits for sources 992-1023 on context 15871
 * base + 0x1F1F84: Reserved
 * ...              (higher context IDs would fit here, but wouldn't fit
 *                   inside the per-context priority vector)
 * base + 0x1FFFFC: Reserved
 * base + 0x200000: Priority threshold for context 0
 * base + 0x200004: Claim/complete for context 0
 * base + 0x200008: Reserved
 * ...
 * base + 0x200FFC: Reserved
 * base + 0x201000: Priority threshold for context 1
 * base + 0x201004: Claim/complete for context 1
 * ...
 * base + 0xFFE000: Priority threshold for context 15871
 * base + 0xFFE004: Claim/complete for context 15871
 * base + 0xFFE008: Reserved
 * ...
 * base + 0xFFFFFC: Reserved
 */

## Interrupt Priorities

Each PLIC interrupt source can be assigned a priority by writing to its 32-bit
memory-mapped `priority` register.  A priority value of 0 is reserved to mean
``never interrupt'' and effectively dissables the interrupt. Priority 1 is the
lowest active priority.  Ties between global interrupts of the same priority
are broken by the Interrupt ID; interrupts with the lowest ID have the highest
effective priority.

## Interrupt Pending Bits

The current status of the interrupt source pending bits in the PLIC core can be
read from the pending array, organized as words of 32 bits.  The pending bit
for interrupt ID $N$ is stored in bit $(N$ mod $32)$ of word $(N/32)$.  Bit 0
of word 0, which represents the non-existent interrupt source 0, is hardwired
to zero.

A pending bit in the PLIC core can be cleared by setting the associated enable
bit then performing a claim.

## Interrupt Enables

Each global interrupt can be enabled by setting the corresponding bit in the
`enables` register. The `enables` registers are accessed as a contiguous array
of 32-bit words, packed the same way as the `pending` bits. Bit 0 of enable
word 0 represents the non-existent interrupt ID 0 and is hardwired to 0.

## Priority Thresholds

The PLIC supports setting of a interrupt priority threshold via the `threshold`
register.  The `threshold` is a WARL field.  The PLIC will mask all PLIC
interrupts of a priority less than or equal to `threshold`.  For example, a
`threshold` value of zero permits all interrupts with non-zero priority.

## Interrupt Claim Process

The PLIC can perform an interrupt claim by reading the `claim/complete`
register, which returns the ID of the highest priority pending interrupt or
zero if there is no pending interrupt.  A successful claim will also atomically
clear the corresponding pending bit on the interrupt source.

The PLIC can perform a claim at any time.

The claim operation is not affected by the setting of the priority threshold
register.

## Interrupt Completion

The PLIC signals it has completed executing an interrupt handler by writing the
interrupt ID it received from the claim to the `claim/complete` register.  The
PLIC does not check whether the completion ID is the same as the last claim ID
for that target.  If the completion ID does not match an interrupt source that
is currently enabled for the target, the completion is silently ignored.
